---
version: 1.1
last_updated: 3/21/2023
aliases: Interleukin 17
type: Cytokine
status: Unverified
---

# IL-17

Interleukin 17 family (IL17 family) is a family of pro-inflammatory cystine knot cytokines. They are produced by a group of T helper cell known as T helper 17 cell in response to their stimulation with [[IL-23]]. Originally, Th17 was identified in 1993 by Rouvier et al. who isolated IL17A transcript from a rodent T-cell hybridoma. The protein encoded by IL17A is a founding member of IL-17 family (see below). IL17A protein exhibits a high homology with a viral IL-17-like protein (O40633) encoded in the genome of T-lymphotropic rhadinovirus Herpesvirus saimiri. In rodents, IL-17A is often referred to as CTLA8.

The biologically active IL-17 interacts with type I cell surface receptor [[IL-17R]]. In turn, there are at least three variants of IL-17R referred to as [[IL17RA]], [[IL17RB]], and [[IL17RC]]. After binding to the receptor, IL-17 activates several signalling cascades that, in turn, lead to the induction of chemokines. Acting as chemoattractants, these chemokines recruit the immune cells, such as [[monocyte]]s and [[neutrophil]]s to the site of inflammation. Typically, the signaling events mentioned above follow an invasion of the body by pathogens. Promoting the inflammation, IL-17 acts in concert with tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1. Moreover, an activation of IL-17 signalling is often observed in the pathogenesis of various autoimmune disorders, such as psoriasis.

# References
1. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interleukin_17)

---
_Tags:_ #ref #protein #marker #immune #cytokines

