---
aliases: 
type: Concept
---

(Back to [[immune system]])

# Complement System

The complement system is a group of **circulating blood proteins** that galvanize innate and adaptive immunity in response to a pathogen.
## Complement Pathways
- [[classical complement pathway]]
- [[lectin-binding complement pathway]]
- [[alternative complement pathway]]
## Functions
- [[opsonization]] (C3b, C4b)
- [[anaphylatoxins]] (C3a, C5a)
- [[membrane attack complex]] (C5b-C9)
- [[immune complex clearance]] (C3b)
## Regulation
- [[C1INH]] (C1qr2s2)
- [[DAF]] (both C3 convertases)
- [[CR1]] (C4b and C3b)
- [[Protectin]] (MAC, C9)
- [[Factor H]]
- [[C4BP]]
## Clinical Tests
- [[CH50 test]]
## Pathology
- [[C1X deficiency]]
- [[C1INH deficiency]]
- [[paroxysmal nocturnal hemaglobinuria]]
- [[C1-4 deficiency]]
- [[C5-8 deficiency]]

---
Tags: #MED #immunology #heme_lymph 

### Wikipedia
_From Wikipedia_

The complement system, also known as complement cascade, is a part of the immune system that enhances (complements) the ability of antibodies and phagocytic cells to clear microbes and damaged cells from an organism, promote inflammation, and attack the pathogen's cell membrane. It is part of the [[innate immune system]], which is not adaptable and does not change during an individual's lifetime. The complement system can, however, be recruited and brought into action by [[antibody|antibodies]] generated by the adaptive immune system.

The complement system consists of a number of small proteins that are synthesized by the liver, and circulate in the blood as inactive precursors. When stimulated by one of several triggers, proteases in the system cleave specific proteins to release cytokines and initiate an amplifying cascade of further cleavages. The end result of this complement activation or complement fixation cascade is stimulation of phagocytes to clear foreign and damaged material, inflammation to attract additional phagocytes, and activation of the cell-killing membrane attack complex. About 50 proteins and protein fragments make up the complement system, including serum proteins, and cell membrane receptors. They account for about 10% of the globulin fraction of blood serum.

Three biochemical pathways activate the complement system: the classical complement pathway, the alternative complement pathway, and the lectin pathway. The alternative pathway accounts for the majority of terminal pathway activation and so therapeutic efforts in disease have revolved around its inhibition.